Ab/refinements and reorg (#47)
NASA-IMPACT/virtual-stores-feasibility-report: recommendations.qmd

---
title: "Recommendations"
---

## Design files, chunks, and aggregated chunk manifests around typical use case patterns

The most important design input for a virtual store is a clear understanding of how the data will actually be accessed. Chunk layout and manifest structure should be optimized for the dominant access pattern of the intended user community.

> For example, time series analysis is the primary use case for NISAR. A frame-oriented chunk manifest design ensures efficient per-frame loading. This decision should be made deliberately, with awareness of the trade-offs for other access patterns (see [Known Limitations](limitations.qmd)).

Reviewer: There is no trade off with other access patterns here? Per-frame time-series is an enhancement for the user community and doesn't detract from anything.

Author: I'm understanding from this that creating a global mosaic is not feasible with the current structure of the data and limitations of virtual stores, is that right? 

I updated this example to be generically about time series in https://github.com/NASA-IMPACT/virtual-stores-feasibility-report/pull/47/changes/88370e1a773781751a3cbd476be96530a4969f09

## Adopt icechunk

> [Icechunk](icechunk.io) should be adopted but with risk mitigation measures. While open source, this technology is maintained by a small and external development team. This introduces a risk which is a dependency on that external development team. NASA should mitigate this risk by funding icechunk maintenance, and even more specifically, funding the feature to parse chunk manifests back out of icechunk. This will enable chunk manifests to be read back out of icechunk stores and stored in another format.

Reviewer: It might be worth adding something about funding IceChunk readers for other ecosystems (C/C++, Julia, R, etc.)

---
title: "Recommendations"
---

## Design files, chunks, and aggregated chunk manifests around typical use case patterns

> The most important design input for a virtual store is a clear understanding of how the data will actually be accessed. Chunk layout and manifest structure should be optimized for the dominant access pattern of the intended user community.

Reviewer 2: How exactly does this impact VDS? does it improve performance when generating a store? Or accessing? Or both? ( I genuinely don't know, but since this is high-level recommendation, we ought to explain the "why".)

Author: https://github.com/NASA-IMPACT/virtual-stores-feasibility-report/pull/47/commits/85ad326f162a6736ec4e0e3188fe5bc0208fd609 and https://github.com/NASA-IMPACT/virtual-stores-feasibility-report/pull/47/commits/fa1cdf83757a5be27b30200621806ba0f0068f13

The most important design input for a virtual store is a clear understanding of how the data will actually be accessed. Chunk layout and manifest structure should be optimized for the dominant access pattern of the intended user community.

### Example: NISAR time series analysis

For NISAR data where time series analysis is the primary use case, a frame-oriented chunk manifest design ensures efficient per-frame loading. This decision should be made deliberately, with awareness of the trade-offs for other access patterns (see [Known Limitations](limitations.qmd)).
For example, time series analysis is a common use case. However, many datasets are collected into one file per timestep. This makes sense, since data is collected over time: generating one file at a time makes data processing straight-forward since there is no appending to an existing file. However, this means time series will never be optimized since data for one timeseries is scattered across n-timesteps number of chunks. Designing how files are chunked is a decision that should made deliberately, with awareness of the trade-offs for other access patterns.

## Adopt icechunk

> Icechunk should be adopted but with risk mitigation measures. Specifically, the ability to parse chunk manifests out of icechunk will enable chunk manifests to be read back out of icechunk stores and stored in another format. 

Reviewer 2: Again since this is a manager-level recommendation, it would help to provide a basic understanding of what icechunk is, and why it should be adopted.

Author: https://github.com/NASA-IMPACT/virtual-stores-feasibility-report/pull/47/commits/0cce5b71c686607a38669984cc0cb989ecae5a4b

## Adopt GeoZarr standards

> **Adoption of GeoZarr is recommended** for future virtual store implementations to ensure interoperability and long-term maintainability.

Reviewer 2: Looks like this is removed in the PR so this may be OBE, but we ought to explain how GeoZarr is utilized within the virtual store framework (just suggesting a bit more context here).

Author: https://github.com/NASA-IMPACT/virtual-stores-feasibility-report/pull/47/commits/9a10e7d3c240101df664c1ba984f24ccd058712a

> More specifically, NASA should fund:

Reviewer 3: The heading "More specifically, NASA should fund" sounds like a recommendation to fund a 3rd party to do something. Purchasing and grants, as you know, are their own thing in the federal government. There are procedures. As a contractor who is not involved in purchasing or grant making, I don't think I can have my name on a document that sounds like I'm telling NASA what to buy when I used NASA time to work on that document.

Could we please change this to:

```
More specifically, NASA should work on:
* Development of parsing chunk manifests back out of Icechunk. This will enable chunk manifests to be read back out of icechunk stores and stored in another format
* Icechunk maintenance
* Icechunk readers in other languages (C/C++, Julia, R, etc.)
```
If you really want to keep the original language in the document, that is perfectly fine! There is definitely a school of thought that believes NASA should just directly fund open source stuff. I'll just need to submit a PR to remove my name from the author list. My contributions to the document are pretty minor, so I think that would be a reasonable solution.

Reviewer 2: This didn't sit right with me either - that is a strong recommendation that I don't think is particularly reasonable. I also agree with softening the language to support or contribute to OSS efforts towards these listed goals.

Author: Totally fine with me to change the wording to "should work on"!

Author: https://github.com/NASA-IMPACT/virtual-stores-feasibility-report/pull/47/commits/b388983903b24ebb147ad159265777a0e7e25510

Reviewer 3: This addresses my funding concern. Thank you.

## Documentation and onboarding

> Virtual store documentation is already underway — PO.DAAC's cookbook chapter, ASDC's demo notebooks and [Resources](./resources.qmd) all represent ongoing efforts. The next step is consolidating and improving these materials to serve two distinct audiences: data providers virtualizing datasets, and data users accessing virtual stores.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Virtual store documentation is already underway — [PO.DAAC's cookbook chapter](https://podaac.github.io/tutorials/quarto_text/UsingVirtualDatasets.html), [ASDC's demo notebook](https://earthaccess.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user/tutorials/virtual_dataset_tutorial_with_TEMPO_Level3/) and [Resources](./resources.qmd) all represent ongoing efforts. The next step is consolidating and improving these materials to serve two distinct audiences: data providers virtualizing datasets, and data users accessing virtual stores.
```
